We must determine whether petitioner’s cost basis in the assets that it purchased from Ferroxcube is equal to the fair market value of those assets.
 
Petitioner maintains that the value of the preferred stock issued to Ferroxcube is not ascertainable. Consequently, petitioner argues that in determining the cost of the assets it purchased from Ferroxcube, the value of the preferred stock, cash, and promissory note that it gave to Ferroxcube should be presumed to be equal to the value of the assets that it received in exchange therefor. Respondent, on the other hand, contends that it is inappropriate to apply such a presumption to the instant case. According to respondent, Ferroxcube was not in a position to bargain for property of equal value because petitioner was the only party interested in buying the assets of *963 Ferroxcube’s Memory Systems Division. Furthermore, respondent maintains that the preferred stock issued to Ferroxcube did have an ascertainable value equal to the redemption price of such stock. For the reasons set forth below, we hold for respondent.
 
Generally, the cost basis of property purchased with other property is the fair market value of the property received in the exchange. Philadelphia Park Amusement Co. v. United States, 130 Ct. Cl. 166, 126 F. Supp. 184 (1954); Williams v. Commissioner, 37 T.C. 1099 (1962). On the other hand, where a corporation acquires property in exchange for its own stock, the cost basis of such property is the value of the stock given up in the exchange.4 Simmonds Precision Products, Inc. v. Commissioner, 75 T.C. 103 (1980); Pittsburgh Terminal Corp. v. Commissioner, 60 T.C. 80 (1973), affd. per order 500 F.2d 1400 (3d Cir. 1974). Nevertheless, where stock is exchanged for property pursuant to an arm’s-length transaction, the courts have, in certain instances, presumed that the value of such stock equaled the value of the property received in exchange therefor. See Pittsburgh Terminal Corp. v. Commissioner, supra; Moore-McCormack Lines, Inc. v. Commissioner, 44 T.C. 745 (1965). See also Philadelphia Park Amusement Co. v. United States, supra. This is sometimes referred to as the barter-equation method of valuation.
 
Relying on Pittsburgh Terminal Corp. v. Commissioner, supra, petitioner insists that we apply the barter-equation method of valuation and determine the value of the preferred stock issued to Ferroxcube and correspondingly its cost basis in the assets it received from Ferroxcube by reference to the value of those assets. In Pittsburgh Terminal Corp., a newly formed corporation received virtually all of its assets in exchange for all but an insignificant portion of its stock. To ascertain the corporation’s basis in the property received, this Court determined the value of such stock by reference to the fair market value of the property stating:
While it may be true that the stock of a going concern can be valued *964 independently of the assets which are acquired with such stock, we think that it is nonsensical to try to look at the value of the stock separately from that of the property where, as here, all of the stock of a corporation which has never conducted any business is exchanged for property which will become all of the assets of such corporation. Any evaluation of the stock of the corporation will necessarily be based upon the income which can be expected from the property.
 
Regardless of the precise rule of valuation that we were attempting to apply, we have always followed the evidence of value on either side of the transaction which we considered to be the most reliable. * * * [60 T.C. at 88; emphasis added.]
 
 
On the basis of the record before us, we find that Pittsburgh Terminal Corp. is distinguishable. First, in Pittsburgh Terminal Corp., all but an insignificant portion of the corporation’s stock was given as consideration for the property, and such property thereafter represented all of the corporation’s assets. Therefore, the value of the corporation’s stock necessarily reflected the value of the underlying corporate assets. Second, and more importantly, we do not think that the fair market value of the property that petitioner received from Ferroxcube constitutes reliable evidence of the value of the preferred shares that petitioner issued to Ferroxcube. In Pittsburgh Terminal Corp., we emphasized that we have always followed reliable evidence of value on either side of the transaction, and therein we found that the value of the property received in exchange for the corporation’s stock represented reliable evidence of the value of such stock. Obviously, we reached this conclusion because it is normally presumed that properties exchanged in an arm’s-length transaction will be equal in value. In the instant case, however, respondent has challenged this presumption and the record supports his position.
 
During 1971, Ferroxcube and NAPCO, its parent, decided to sell Ferroxcube’s Memory Systems Division because they believed it was an unprofitable operation. If, however, they were unable to sell the Memory Systems Division, they had decided to scrap its assets for salvage value. After Ferroxcube had been unable to find a buyer, four key management employees of the Memory Systems Division formed petitioner to purchase the division’s assets. Consequently, it appears that *965 petitioner was the only party interested in purchasing the Memory Systems Division,5 leaving Ferroxcube with the choice of selling the division to petitioner or scrapping its assets for salvage value. Since petitioner had been organized by four employees of the Memory Systems Division who must have known the options that Ferroxcube faced, it is clear that Ferroxcube was placed at a distinct disadvantage in negotiating a sale to petitioner. Under these circumstances, we cannot find that petitioner and Ferroxcube were dealing at arm’s length in the ordinary sense of that term. See C. G. Meaker Co. v. Commissioner, 16 T.C. 1348 (1951). Fair market value has been defined as the price at which property would be sold by a knowledgeable seller to a knowledgeable buyer with neither party under any compulsion to act. Pittsburgh Terminal Corp. v. Commissioner, supra at 88. We believe, in light of the lack of any evidence to the contrary, that respondent acted reasonably in assuming that Ferroxcube found itself forced to sell the Memory Systems Division’s assets to petitioner at a price below their fair market value rather than scrapping those assets for salvage value.6
 
Furthermore, the record indicates that the preferred stock that petitioner issued to Ferroxcube was worth nowhere near the amount that petitioner would have us find. The series A and series B preferred stock issued to Ferroxcube were redeemable by petitioner for a total price of $100,000. To accept petitioner’s position, we would have to find that such preferred stock had a value of $652,180.7 We find it difficult to believe that stock worth $652,180 would be redeemable for only $100,000. Although petitioner maintains that the conversion privilege that accompanied the series B preferred stock was of considerable value, the record clearly shows that the *966 conversion privilege could not account for this discrepancy. At the time of sale, 345,000 shares of petitioner’s common stock were outstanding and another 40,000 had been subscribed, while the series B preferred stock issued to Ferroxcube was only convertible into 22,500 shares of common stock. Moreover, if anything, the record indicates that at the time of the sale 22,500 shares of petitioner’s common stock were worth considerably less than the $50,000 redemption price of the series B preferred stock issued to Ferroxcube.
 
Petitioner contends that Pittsburgh Terminal Corp. is not distinguishable from the instant case because as long as the preferred stock issued to Ferroxcube is outstanding, the restrictions placed upon petitioner’s common stock under the purchase agreement render such stock valueless, and, therefore, for all practical purposes the preferred stock was petitioner’s only outstanding stock. This argument is untenable. Regardless of the restrictions, petitioner’s common stock was the only stock that had the right to vote. While the purchase agreement restricted the payment of dividends or the distribution of property to the common stockholders, it did not totally prohibit such distributions but simply set forth conditions that had to be satisfied prior thereto. Moreover, the fact remains that petitioner, who was controlled by the shareholders of its common stock, had the right to redeem all of the preferred stock issued to Ferroxcube for only $100,000.
 
Finally, petitioner argues that it negotiated a purchase of the assets of Ferroxcube’s Memory Systems Division at the book value of those assets to Ferroxcube, but used the appraised fair market value of those assets as the cost basis therefor even though that amount was substantially less than the negotiated purchase price, that is, the book value. Therefore, petitioner insists that the cost of the assets that it purchased is at least equal to the fair market value of those assets. We, however, are unable to find anything in the record that establishes that the parties negotiated a sale at book value. Significantly, petitioner failed to produce any evidence whatsoever with respect to the negotiations. Nor did petitioner present any evidence that would indicate what Ferroxcube believed the preferred stock was worth or what value Ferroxcube assigned to the preferred stock for tax purposes. Indeed, *967 there is absolutely no evidence in the record with respect to Ferroxcube’s treatment of this transaction.
 
In conclusion, under the circumstances presented herein we are not required to use the barter-equation method of valuation to value the preferred stock that petitioner issued to Ferroxcube. In Seas Shipping Co. v. Commissioner, 371 F.2d 528, 529 (2d Cir. 1967), affg. a Memorandum Opinion of this Court, the Court of Appeals stated as follows:
There are obvious dangers in evaluating the consideration involved in one side of a barter by determining the worth of the consideration of the other side. In the first place, the two sides of the barter may, for various reasons, not be equal in value.* * * [Emphasis added.]
 
On the basis of the record, we must conclude that this is such a case. See C. G. Meaker & Co. v. Commissioner, supra. Although petitioner has asserted that the value of the preferred stock is not ascertainable, respondent has valued such stock and petitioner has not offered any evidence to rebut that valuation aside from the use of the barter-equation method. Since we have rejected the use of this method of valuation in the instant case, we find that petitioner has failed to meet its burden of proof and sustain respondent’s determination. See Rule 142(a), Tax Court Rules of Practice and Procedure. We have considered all of petitioner’s other arguments and found them unpersuasive.
 
To reflect the foregoing,
 
Decision will be entered under Rule 155.
 
All Citations
79 T.C. 957, Tax Ct. Rep. (CCH) 39,544



Footnotes
|
*
|This case was submitted fully stipulated to judge sheldon v. ekman, who died on Jan. 18, 1982. it was reassigned to Judge Lapsley W. Hamblen, Jr., for disposition by order of the Chief Judge.
|
1
|Respondent has conceded that the assets had a fair market value equal to that determined pursuant to the appraisal by Marshall & Stevens, Inc.
|
2
|The purchase price was apportioned among the assets according to their relative fair market value as determined pursuant to the appraisal by Marshall & Stevens, Inc.
|
3
|Petitioner has conceded that the going-concern value of assets it purchased from Ferroxcube was $8,100.
|
4
|Such a transaction is treated differently because under sec. 1032, I.R.C. 1954, a corporation does not realize any gain or loss when it purchases property with its own stock. See Pittsburgh Terminal Corp. v. Commissioner, 60 T.C. 80, 87-88 (1973), affd. per order (3d Cir. 1974).
|
5
|Unfortunately, the record does not indicate why Ferroxcube was unable to find another buyer.
|
6
|On brief, petitioner has attempted to equate the term salvage value as used in the stipulation of facts with the fair market value of the assets received from Ferroxcube, arguing that the sale Ferroxcube made to petitioner constituted a disposition of those assets for their salvage value. Not only is this argument farfetched, but it is wholly unsupported by the record.
|
7
|This figure represents the difference between the consideration paid by petitioner attributable to the cash and promissory note ($228,000) and the fair market value of the assets received by petitioner, including the going-concern value of those assets ($880,180).
|







End of Document
|© 2025 Thomson Reuters. No claim to original U.S. Government Works.
|





