
BACKGROUND:
On August 22, 2007, the Court issued a protective order to prevent disclosure of petitioner’s proprietary and confidential information. The facts and opinion have been adapted accordingly, and any information set forth herein is not proprietary or confidential. VERITAS U.S. is a Delaware corporation with its principal place of business in Cupertino, California. During 1999, 2000, and 2001 (years in issue) VERITAS U.S. was the parent of a group of affiliated subsidiaries.
 
VERITAS U.S. is in the business of developing, manufacturing, marketing, and selling advanced storage management software products. VERITAS US’ products protect against data loss and file corruption, provide rapid recovery after disk or system failure, process large files efficiently, manage and back up systems without user interruption, and provide  *300 performance improvement and reliability enhancement features that are critical for many commercial applications.
 
In the mid to late 1990s VERITAS U.S. expanded its business through corporate acquisitions and the establishment of foreign subsidiaries. On April 25, 1997, VERITAS U.S. acquired and merged with OpenVision Technologies, Inc. (OpenVision). With the acquisition of OpenVision, VERITAS U.S. obtained NetBackup;3 offices in the United Kingdom, Germany, and France; an engineering team; and skilled sales and marketing executives. By the end of 1997 VERITAS U.S. had sales subsidiaries in Canada, Japan, the United Kingdom, Germany, France, Sweden, and the Netherlands. VERITAS US, on May 28, 1999, acquired Seagate Software Network and Storage Management Group, Inc. (NSMG). As a result of this acquisition, VERITAS U.S. became the largest storage software company in the industry and obtained Backup Exec;4 a distribution channel in Europe, the Middle East, and Africa (EMEA); and a sales force that sold Backup Exec to customers in Europe. On July 2, 2005, VERITAS U.S. was purchased by Symantec Corp. (Symantec) and became one of Symantec’s wholly owned subsidiaries. References to petitioner are to VERITAS US, its subsidiaries, and Symantec (successor in interest to VERITAS U.S. and subsidiaries).
 


I. Storage Management Software Products
All computer operating systems have “backup” and “restore” capabilities.5 Storage management software replaces the portion of a computer’s operating system that organizes files and manages data storage devices. Stored data is preserved and protected against loss or corruption by the use of backup applications that copy, on secondary storage, the data, its organizational structure, and its ownership information. Secondary storage devices may be attached directly to a computer or accessed through a network server.
 
Prior to 1999 only one application could access a data file at any given time. Thus, to back up data on secondary storage, it was first necessary to shut down all applications using *301 the data. Most secondary storage was on magnetic tape and directly attached to a single server. After the CSA, there were important technological advances relating to the data storage software industry. In response to 24–hour Web sites, backup technology advanced significantly, enabling backups to run at any time. In addition, exponential increases in file size and data volume and the plummeting cost of disk storage spurred the use of disks as secondary storage. The switch to disks as the primary backup medium required the source code6 of backup products to be rewritten. The advent of storage area networks allowed storage to be shared by numerous computers, allowed more than one server to access a particular piece of data, and enabled applications to run continuously without interruption. Other technological advances dramatically increased storage capacity and also facilitated disaster recovery by allowing storage resources to be replicated several times in different data centers. These advances reduced the cost of physical storage and made it possible for many systems to share storage devices.
 
During the years in issue, VERITAS U.S. had one primary commercial product (i.e., a product with a low price point and high-volume sales), Backup Exec, and five primary enterprise products (i.e., products with a high price point and low-volume sales): NetBackup, Volume Manager, File System, Cluster Server, and Foundation Suite.
 
Backup Exec, which was targeted to small businesses, was a data management product that provided backup, archive, and restore capabilities for a network’s servers and workstations. NetBackup, Volume Manager, File System, Cluster Server, and Foundation Suite were purchased by businesses with large sophisticated information technology systems. NetBackup provided backup, archive, and restore capabilities for servers and workstations using complex UNIX, Windows, Linux, and NetWare operating systems. Volume Manager allowed an administrator to manage volumes (i.e., physical disks or hard drives that stored data) and also provided online disk storage management. File System was a journaling system that provided a directory index of files and *302 made it easier to find and access files and data. File System also enabled fast system recovery from operating system failure or disruption. Cluster Server allowed multiple servers to be grouped together as a cluster and, if one server failed, another server was automatically activated to perform the functions of the failed server. Volume Manager had Cluster Server functionality by 1999 and File System had such functionality by 2000. Foundation Suite combined Volume Manager and File System to deliver a complete solution for online disk and file management functions. The consolidated product facilitated quicker and more efficient data transmission, storage, and backup. Foundation Suite was also sold in a high availability version. This version combined Foundation Suite and Cluster Server and ensured continuous uninterrupted operation in the event of system failure.
 
Many of VERITAS US’ products were deemed “sticky” because after employing them it was difficult, costly, and time consuming for the user to change to a competing product. These products communicated with and controlled parts of the computer and its attached devices without support from standard application program interfaces (API)7 or device drivers. Consequently, the software code in these products included code inextricably tied to the most basic part of an operating system. In 1999 VERITAS U.S. software products could run on systems and applications manufactured by Sun Microsystems, Inc. (Sun); Hewlett–Packard Co. (HP); Microsoft Corp. (Microsoft); International Business Machines Corp. (IBM); Red Hat, Inc.; Apple Inc.; Novell, Inc. (Novell); Oracle Corp. (Oracle); SAP AG; Sybase, Inc.; and VMware, Inc. After the CSA, VERITAS U.S. released numerous versions of its aforementioned products. Each version contained new features. When new features were added to a product, the source code relating to these features was either added to existing files or placed in newly created files. While no one feature modification significantly altered the essential elements of the code, the cumulative effect of modifying hundreds of features typically resulted in significant code changes.
 


*303 II. Product Distribution Channels
A product’s path to market is often referred to as a distribution channel. In 1999 VERITAS U.S. sold its products directly to customers and through original equipment manufacturers (OEMs), distributors, and resellers. From 1997 to 2006 VERITAS U.S. entered into OEM agreements with several entities including Sun, HP, Dell Products, L .P. (Dell), Compaq Computer Corp. (Compaq), Ericsson Radio Systems AB (Ericsson), Hitachi, Ltd. (Hitachi), NEC Corp. (NEC), Microsoft, NCR Corp. (NCR), and Siemens Nixdorf Informationssysteme AG (Siemens). VERITAS U.S. provided the OEMs with the product and the OEMs sold the products either bundled with their operating systems or unbundled as an option. Bundled products were installed with, and sold as a part of, the operating system, while unbundled products were sold as separate products for customers to install. During the term of the license, OEMs generally received the current version of the products plus updates, upgrades, and new versions. After selling VERITAS US’ bundled products, the OEMs often provided technical, engineering, and maintenance support. The OEMs’ willingness to sell and support the bundled products was a tacit affirmation of the products’ reliability and quality. VERITAS U.S. benefited from this arrangement because the OEMs had better name recognition and more customers.
 
From November 1999 to 2006 OEM licensees paid VERITAS U.S. $1.327 billion in royalties.8 The calculation of royalties was based on list price, revenues, or profits and the products were often sold at a discount off list price. VERITAS U.S. generally received a one-time license fee upon entering into the agreement and additional license fees each time the OEM sold VERITAS U.S. products bundled with an operating system. The royalty rates relating to VERITAS US’ OEM licenses ranged from 10 to 40 percent for bundled products and 5 to 48 percent for unbundled products. Profit potential and sales volume were important factors in determining royalty rates. VERITAS U.S. could not accurately predict the amount of its *304 license revenue receipts attributable to OEM agreements because VERITAS U.S. had no control over delivery dates or the number of VERITAS U.S. products sold with OEM operating systems. This uncertainty led VERITAS U.S. to explore other paths to market (i.e., distributors, resellers, and direct sales) for its products.
 
VERITAS U.S. sold Backup Exec through distributors and resellers. The distributors sold Backup Exec to resellers and the resellers sold it to customers. VERITAS U.S. sold NetBackup, Volume Manager, File System, Cluster Server, and Foundation Suite directly to customers and through resellers. Between 1997 and 2005 VERITAS U.S. entered into reseller agreements with operating system, hardware, and database vendors including Compaq, Hitachi, Fujitsu, Ericsson, Dell, HP, NCR, Bull S.A., and EMC Corp. (EMC). The royalty rates relating to the reseller agreements ranged between 32.5 and 70 percent.
 


III. Intensely Competitive Market
Prior to the CSA, VERITAS U.S. products competed intensely with products manufactured by numerous companies. ARCserve, a backup product manufactured by Computer Associates, was Backup Exec’s major competitor. NetBackup’s primary competitors included IBM’s Tivoli Storage Manager, EMC’s Legato NetWorker, HP’s OmniBackup/Data Protector, and CommVault’s Galaxy. Foundation Suite’s primary competitors were products manufactured by operating system, hardware, and database vendors (i.e., Sun, EMC, and Oracle).
 
VERITAS U.S. products competed with both comparable and free alternatives. The free alternatives included storage management products readily accessible on the Internet and those bundled with operating systems. Vendors sometimes incorporated storage management capabilities into their operating systems. Some customers preferred operating systems with built-in storage management software (i.e., integrated stacks).9 These stacks were less expensive and easier to deploy because purchasers were not required to acquire or install costly individual components. VERITAS U.S. *305 continuously sought to offer products that were faster and more efficient than comparable products or free alternatives. The performance advantages of VERITAS U.S. products over free products decreased, however, as competitors improved their products’ functionality.
 
Between 1996 and 2006 the primary competition for VERITAS U.S. products was products sold by operating system, hardware, and database vendors such as Sun and Oracle. Sun and Oracle had a similar objective-remove VERITAS U.S. from their respective stacks and provide their respective customers with viable alternatives to VERITAS U.S. products.
 
Sun, an operating system manufacturer and distributor, was one of VERITAS US’ main OEM contractors and competitors. The relationship between VERITAS U.S. and Sun evolved from a mutually beneficial partnership in 1997 to mutual tolerance in 1999 and, ultimately, to outright competition in 2006. Sun was committed to capturing the funds that its customers were spending on VERITAS U.S. products. Sun upgraded its operating systems in an attempt to replicate the functionality of VERITAS U.S. products and achieved this goal by adding to its operating system a supplanting product that was provided to customers at no cost. From 2000 through 2006 Sun released a series of operating systems that included software products that offered progressively more functionality. These products took market share from VERITAS U.S. and closed the technology gap between Sun and VERITAS US.
 
Oracle, a software manufacturer known for its databases and applications, was as aggressive as Sun in competing with VERITAS US. Oracle offered software to directly, and successfully, compete with File System, Volume Manager, and Cluster Server. In an attempt to maximize revenues and customer loyalty, Oracle embarked on a strategy to build a complete stack and compete not just with VERITAS US, but also with operating system vendors. Oracle started with basic level technology and continued to innovate until it developed products similar, and ultimately, equal to VERITAS U.S. products.
 


*306 IV. Product Lifecycles and Useful Lives
In the rapidly changing storage software industry, products with state-of-the-art function lost value quickly as that functionality was duplicated by competitors or supplanted by new technology. Even with substantial ongoing research and development (R & D), VERITAS U.S. products had finite lifecycles. Intense competition (i.e., from OEMs offering comparable products) and the rapid pace of technological advances forced VERITAS U.S. to innovate constantly. By the time a new product model became available for purchase, the next generation was already in development.
 
At the time of the CSA, VERITAS U.S. products, on average, had a useful life of 4 years. In 2001 VERITAS US’ board of directors realized that VERITAS US’ primary products were approaching the end of their lifecycles and that the product pipeline was not capable of sustaining business growth. In 2002 and 2003 the board of directors recognized that revenues relating to Backup Exec and NetBackup had ceased to grow and that the revenues relating to Volume Manager and File System were declining. NetBackup’s useful life came to an end in 2005 when a major overhaul was performed. Even as the products approached the end of their useful lives, they did not lose all of their value.
 
VERITAS U.S. typically updated its products but, on occasion, an OEM would pay VERITAS U.S. to build a custom item that would not be further developed. In these instances, the related OEM agreements contained a royalty degradation or technology aging discount provision to account for obsolescence and decay. Some agreements provided for the royalties to be decreased at a steady rate while others required royalty rate reductions that increased during the term of the agreement. Generally, the agreements did not provide a royalty rate reduction of more than 75 percent over a 4–year period.
 


V. Geographic Expansion
Prior to 2000 VERITAS U.S. had limited presence in EMEA and Asia Pacific and Japan (APJ). While VERITAS U.S. had sales and service offices and resellers in North America, Europe, Asia Pacific, South America, and the Middle East, it had no manufacturing operation in these countries and only small sales subsidiaries in the United Kingdom, France, Germany, *307 Sweden, the Netherlands, Switzerland, Japan, and Australia. In 1999 VERITAS US’ international sales force, excluding Canadian employees, consisted of 287 employees: 237 in Europe, 27 in Asia Pacific, and 23 in Japan. VERITAS U.S. had a total of 33 international marketing employees: 28 in Europe, 4 in Japan, and 1 in Asia Pacific.
 
In the EMEA storage management software market (i.e., in which VERITAS U.S. sold Foundation Suite, NetBackup, and Backup Exec), VERITAS US’ market shares in 1998 and 1999 were 8.9 percent and 13.2 percent, respectively. Computer Associates’ ARCserve, Backup Exec’s primary competition, dominated the EMEA market, holding more than 50 percent of the United Kingdom market and more than 60 percent of the French, Italian, and Spanish markets.
 
In 1999 the EMEA and APJ territories accounted for 92 percent of VERITAS US’ international revenues and 22 percent of VERITAS US’ total revenues (i.e., EMEA revenue totaled $110 million and APJ revenue was de minimis). VERITAS US’ management recognized that geographic expansion in EMEA and APJ presented an opportunity to increase sales. After evaluating the cost of labor, employment laws, quality of workforce, and tax considerations, VERITAS US’ management decided to headquarter its EMEA and APJ operations in Ireland.
 


VI. The Cost–Sharing Arrangement
In January 1999 VERITAS Software Holding, Ltd. (VSHL) was incorporated as an Irish corporation. VSHL was a resident of Bermuda and a wholly owned subsidiary of VERITAS US. In August 1999 VERITAS Software International, Ltd. (VSIL) was incorporated as a resident of Ireland and a wholly owned subsidiary of VSHL. VERITAS Software, Ltd. (VERITAS UK) and VERITAS Software Asia Pacific Trading PTE, Ltd. (VERITAS Singapore), disregarded entities for U.S. income tax purposes, were also wholly owned by VSHL. In 2000 and 2001 VSHL, VSIL, VERITAS UK, and VERITAS Singapore (collectively, VERITAS Ireland) were subsidiaries of VERITAS US.
 
Effective November 3, 1999, VERITAS U.S. assigned to VERITAS Ireland all of VERITAS US’ existing sales agreements with European-based sales subsidiaries (i.e., VERITAS UK, VERITAS Sweden, VERITAS Switzerland, VERITAS France, and *308 VERITAS Germany). Also effective on that date, VERITAS US, VERITAS Operating Corp., NSMG, and VERITAS Ireland10 entered into the Agreement for Sharing Research and Development Costs (RDA), and VERITAS U.S. and VERITAS Ireland11 entered into the Technology License Agreement (TLA).12
 
Pursuant to the RDA, the signatories agreed to pool their respective resources and R & D efforts related to software products and software manufacturing processes. They also agreed to share the costs and risks of such R & D on a going-forward basis. The RDA provided VERITAS Ireland with:
the exclusive and perpetual right to manufacture Products utilizing, embodying or incorporating the Covered Intangibles within VERITAS Ireland’s Territory,[13] and the nonexclusive and perpetual right to otherwise utilize the Covered Intangibles worldwide, including in the marketing, sale, and licensing of Products utilizing, embodying or incorporating the Covered Intangibles, and in further research into similar technology.
 
The RDA defined “Covered Intangibles” as:
any and all inventions, patents, copyrights, computer programs (in source code and object code form), flow charts, formulae, enhancements, updates, translations, adaptations, information, specifications, designs, process technology, manufacturing requirements, quality control standards, and other intangible property rights arising from or developed as a result of the Research Program.[14]
 
Pursuant to the TLA, VERITAS U.S. granted VERITAS Ireland the right to use certain “Covered Intangibles”, as well as the right to use VERITAS US’s trademarks, trade names, and service marks in EMEA and APJ. The TLA defined “Covered Intangibles” as:
any and all inventions, patents, copyrights, computer programs (in source code and object code form), flow charts, formulae, enhancements, updates, translations, adaptations, information, specifications, designs, process technology, manufacturing requirements, quality control standards, and other intangible property rights arising in existence as of the Effective Date of *309 this Agreement, relating to the design, development, manufacture, production, operation, maintenance and/or repair of any or all of the Products.
In exchange for the rights granted by the TLA, VERITAS Ireland agreed to pay VERITAS U.S. royalties. The TLA, which was amended on three occasions,15 specified the initial royalty rates, as well as a prepayment amount (i.e., a lump-sum buy-in payment). The TLA provided that the parties “shall adjust the royalty rate prospectively or retrospectively as necessary so that the rate will remain an arm’s-length rate.”
 
In 1999 VERITAS Ireland paid VERITAS U.S. $6.3 million and agreed to prepay VERITAS US, in 2000, the remaining consideration relating to the preexisting intangibles. In 2000 VERITAS Ireland made a $166 million lump-sum buy-in payment to VERITAS US, and in 2002 VERITAS Ireland and VERITAS U.S. adjusted the payment to $118 million.
 


VII. VERITAS Ireland’s Operations
Prior to the establishment of VERITAS Ireland, VERITAS US’ supply chain and distribution channels to the EMEA and APJ markets were weak and inefficient. NetBackup, Volume Manager, File System, Cluster Server, and Foundation Suite were manufactured in Pleasanton, California, and Backup Exec was manufactured by a contractor in Lisle, France (Lisle contractor). In 1999 VERITAS Ireland began codeveloping, manufacturing, and selling VERITAS U.S. products in the EMEA and APJ markets. VERITAS Ireland’s facility, in Shannon, County Clare, Ireland, manufactured NetBackup, File System, Volume Manager, Cluster Server, and Foundation Suite.16 The Ireland location had a production line, quality control stations, and a CD replication tower. VERITAS Ireland controlled all aspects of production, planning, shipping, and logistics. It also processed purchase orders and bore contractual, credit, and collection risks relating to transactions in the EMEA and APJ markets. With VERITAS Ireland in control of the manufacturing process and managing the Lisle contractor, the supply chain became much more efficient.
 
VERITAS Ireland developed the EMEA and APJ markets without significant input from VERITAS US. In 1999 VERITAS US’ *310 customer base had little or no value because of its minimal market share and limited presence in EMEA and APJ. At that time there were two offices in the United Kingdom: One in Chertsey and one in Reading. The Chertsey office was staffed by direct sales employees. The Reading office was staffed by two small teams (i.e., a distribution team and a reseller team) of inept workers. VERITAS Ireland focused on the basics of building a more extensive sales business and stronger distribution channels. In 2000 VERITAS Ireland hired a new distribution sales manager who was responsible for expanding its products’ paths to market. VERITAS Ireland’s new management totally changed the culture by continually upgrading VERITAS Ireland’s sales resources; examining distributor and reseller reports; finding new customers; initiating interaction with the reseller base; providing sales incentives for distributors; training and educating the distributors’ presales teams; and firing underperforming salesmen, distributors, and resellers. To further expand its sales presence, VERITAS Ireland accessed and leveraged its distribution partners’ sales organizations and customer contacts.
 
VERITAS Ireland’s operations and its presence in the EMEA territory grew substantially from 2000 to 2006. By 2001 the Ireland facility had increased from 12,000 to 40,000 square feet and the number of VERITAS Ireland employees had increased from 20 to more than 100. By 2002 VERITAS Ireland had over 25 new offices and subsidiaries in 19 countries, and by 2004 VERITAS Ireland had more than 1,500 employees in more than 30 countries. From 1999 to 2006 VERITAS Ireland spent $1.374 billion on sales and marketing expenses, $676 million on cost-sharing payments, $456 million on customer service expenses, $146 million on administrative expenses, and $124 million on buy-in payments. In 2000 VERITAS Ireland’s first full year of operation, revenues were approximately $200 million. By 2003 VERITAS Ireland’s license revenues had doubled, and by 2004 its annual revenues were five times higher than VERITAS US’ 1999 revenues attributable to EMEA and APJ.
 


*311 VIII. Procedural History
VERITAS U.S. timely filed Federal income tax returns for 2000 and 2001. On its 2000 return VERITAS U.S. reported a $166 million lump-sum buy-in payment from VERITAS Ireland. In response to VERITAS Ireland’s updated sales figures and forecasts, VERITAS US, on December 17, 2002, amended the 2000 return reducing the lump-sum buy-in payment to $118 million.
 
Respondent examined VERITAS US’ 2000 and 2001 returns and concluded that the cost-sharing allocations reported did not clearly reflect VERITAS US’ income. On March 29, 2006, respondent issued petitioner a notice of deficiency based on a report prepared by Brian Becker (Becker). In the notice, respondent stated:
In accordance with Section 482 of the Internal Revenue Code, to clearly reflect the income of the entities, we have allocated income and deductions as a result of the transfer and/or license of preexisting intangible property in connection with the cost sharing arrangement and technology license agreement, both effective November 3, 1999.
Becker employed the forgone profits method, the market capitalization method, and an analysis of VERITAS US’ arm’slength acquisitions to arrive at a series of values, ranging from $1.9 billion to $4 billion, for the lump-sum buy-in payment. He ultimately decided that a $2.5 billion buy-in payment was appropriate. In accordance with Becker’s calculations, respondent, in the notice to petitioner, made a $2.5 billion allocation of income to VERITAS U.S. and determined deficiencies of $704 million and $54 million, and section 6662 penalties of $281 million and $22 million, relating to 2000 and 2001, respectively.
 
On June 26, 2006, petitioner timely filed its petition with the Court seeking redetermination of the deficiencies and penalties set forth in the notice. On August 25, 2006, the Court filed respondent’s answer, and on August 31, 2006, the Court filed respondent’s amended answer. Respondent, in his statement of position filed September 6, 2007, stated: “In view of the fact that information is still being collected and analyzed, Respondent cannot state which transfer pricing method(s) he intends to utilize at trial.” On October 11, 2007, respondent, in a supplement to his statement of position, notified the Court and petitioner that he was going to employ *312 the forgone profits method, but was not going to rely on the market capitalization method or call Becker as a witness. Respondent, in the October 11, 2007, statement also stated:
Respondent will use the actual income figures and projections extrapolated from those figures to determine the value of the intangibles and, consequently, the total compensation due Petitioner from VERITAS Ireland for the intangibles. Based on a preliminary analysis of Petitioner’s actual income figures, which are less than Petitioner’s projections relied upon by Dr. Becker, Respondent anticipates that the resulting value will be less than the amount used in the notice of deficiency. In that case, Respondent will not contend that the value is greater than the amount determined by his experts at trial.
 
On April 10, 2007, the Court filed the parties’ stipulation of settled issues relating to stock-based compensation, technical support services, and section 6662 penalties.17 On May 24, 2007, the Court filed the parties’ stipulation of settled issues relating to the RDA. Pursuant to the May 24, 2007, stipulation, the parties established the 2000 and 2001 arm’s-length values of VERITAS Ireland’s proportional shares of the cost-sharing payments.18
 
On January 11, 2008, the Court filed petitioner’s motion for partial summary judgment. In the motion, petitioner contended that respondent had abandoned the $2.5 billion allocation and the methodologies set forth in the notice; the notice was fundamentally defective; and respondent’s determination was arbitrary, capricious, and unreasonable. Petitioner further contended that, pursuant to precedent governing the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (Ninth Circuit), the burden of proof shifts to respondent. The Court, on February 6, 2008, filed respondent’s notice of objection to petitioner’s motion for partial summary judgment.
 
On March 7, 2008, respondent submitted to the Court an expert report prepared by John Hatch (Hatch). Hatch, employing a discounted cashflow analysis, concluded that the requisite lump-sum buy-in payment was $1.675 billion, and *313 calculated, as an alternative, a 22.2–percent perpetual annual royalty. In determining the best method to calculate the buy-in payment, Hatch rejected the comparable uncontrolled transaction method (CUT method)19 and the profit split method20. He contended that prior to November 3, 1999, VERITAS U.S. had made several acquisitions of software companies that offered complementary, and in some cases, competing products. Hatch opined that those acquisitions were comparable to the CSA because VERITAS U.S. received rights pursuant to the acquisitions that were similar to those which VERITAS Ireland received pursuant to the CSA. On the basis of his findings, Hatch characterized the CSA as “akin” to a sale or geographic spinoff (“akin” to a sale theory) and employed the income method to determine the requisite buy-in payment.
 
Hatch defined the buy-in payment as “the present value of royalty obligations expected to be paid under arm’s length royalty terms applicable to the rights conferred on a go-forward basis.” He did not individually value any of the specific items that were allegedly transferred to VERITAS Ireland. Instead, he employed an “aggregate” valuation approach that was based on a three-step analysis. First, Hatch estimated the arm’s-length royalty amounts that would be due in each period (i.e., each calendar year or portion thereof after November 3, 1999) of the CSA. Second, Hatch chose a discount rate to convert estimated future royalty payments into November 1999 dollars. Third, Hatch calculated the buy-in payment as equal to the present value of the royalty payments estimated in step 1, discounted at the rate determined in step 2. Hatch concluded that the requisite buy-in payment was $1.675 billion and that a 22.2–percent perpetual annual royalty was economically equivalent to the requisite $1.675 billion payment. In calculating the requisite buy-in payment, Hatch assumed that the preexisting intangibles have a perpetual useful life. In addition, he concluded that 13.7 percent was the appropriate discount rate and 17.91 percent was the appropriate compound annual growth rate.
 
*314 On March 21, 2008, the Court filed respondent’s motion for leave to file amendment to amended answer and lodged respondent’s amendment to amended answer. In the proposed amendment, respondent alleged that the requisite buy-in payment was $1.675 billion, payable as either a lump-sum payment or a 22.2–percent perpetual royalty. In paragraph 9.f of the proposed amendment, respondent asserted an adjustment relating to a transfer of “certain other intangible rights.” Respondent specifically alleged a transfer of access to VERITAS US’ marketing team; access to VERITAS US’ R & D team; and VERITAS US’ trademarks, trade names, customer base, customer lists, distribution channels, and sales agreements (collectively, paragraph 9.f items). Petitioner, in its notice of objection to respondent’s motion for leave to file amendment to amended answer filed April 10, 2008, contended that respondent’s assertion of the paragraph 9.f items raised a new matter because the issue was not described in the notice of deficiency and required the presentation of new evidence.
 
On May 2, 2008, the Court held a hearing (May 2 hearing) relating to the aforementioned motions. In an order issued June 13, 2008 (June 13 order), we denied petitioner’s motion for partial summary judgment and concluded that there was a genuine issue with respect to whether respondent had abandoned the theory and methodology set forth in the notice, petitioner had failed to establish that the notice was fundamentally defective, and petitioner had therefore failed to establish that the determination was arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable. With respect to whether the burden of proof shifts to respondent, we concluded that it was premature to rule on the issue. We also granted respondent’s motion for leave to file amendment to amended answer and concluded that the notice of deficiency was sufficiently broad to include the paragraph 9.f items and, therefore, respondent’s amendment to amended answer did not raise a new matter. We stated:
if, after an evaluation of expert and fact witnesses, we determine that an adjustment relating to such items is not appropriate, that such items were not in fact transferred, or that such items are not intangibles pursuant to section 482, we may conclude that the notice of deficiency is arbitrary, capricious, or unreasonable. * * *
*315 On July 1, 2008, the trial commenced.
 
