TITLE:
United States Tax Court.
ALTERA CORPORATION AND SUBSIDIARIES, Petitioner
v.
COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE, Respondent.
Nos. 6253–12, 9963–12
|

BACKGROUND:
Petitioner is an affiliated group of corporations that filed consolidated Federal income tax returns for the years at issue. During all relevant years, Altera Corp. (Altera U.S.), the parent company, was a Delaware corporation, and Altera International, a subsidiary of Altera U.S., was a Cayman Islands corporation. When petitioner filed its petitions with this Court, the principal place of business of Altera U.S. was in California.
 


*93 I. Petitioner’s R & D Cost–Sharing Agreement
Petitioner develops, manufactures, markets, and sells programmable logic devices (PLDs) and related hardware, software, and pre-defined design building blocks for use in programming the PLDs (programming tools). Altera U.S. and Altera International entered into concurrent agreements that became effective May 23, 1997: a master technology license agreement (technology license agreement) and a technology research and development cost-sharing agreement (R & D cost-sharing agreement).
 
Under the technology license agreement, Altera U.S. licensed to Altera International the right to use and exploit, everywhere except the United States and Canada, all of Altera U.S.’s intangible property relating to PLDs and programming tools that existed before the R & D cost-sharing agreement (pre-cost-sharing intangible property). In exchange for the rights granted under the technology license agreement, Altera International paid royalties to Altera U.S. in each year from 1997 through 2003. As of December 31, 2003, Altera International owned a fully paid-up license to use the pre-cost-sharing intangible property in its territory.
 
Under the R & D cost-sharing agreement, Altera U.S. and Altera International agreed to pool their respective resources to conduct research and development using the pre-cost-sharing intangible property. Under the R & D cost-sharing agreement, Altera U.S. and Altera International agreed to share the risks and costs of research and development activities they performed on or after May 23, 1997. The R & D cost-sharing agreement was in effect from May 23, 1997, through 2007.
 
During each of petitioner’s taxable years ending December 31, 2004, December 30, 2005, December 29, 2006, and December 28, 2007 (2004–07 taxable years), Altera U.S. granted stock options and other stock-based compensation to certain of its employees. Certain of the employees of Altera U.S. who performed research and development activities subject to the R & D cost-sharing agreement received stock options or other stock-based compensation. The employees’ cash compensation was included in the cost pool under the R & D cost-sharing agreement. Their stock-based compensation was not included.
 
*94 Pursuant to the R & D cost-sharing agreement, Altera International made the following cost-sharing payments to Altera U.S. for its 2004–07 taxable years:
 




Year
 
|Cost-sharing payment
 
|
2004
 
|$129,469,233
 
|
2005
 
|160,722,953
 
|
2006
 
|164,836,577
 
|
2007
 
|192,755,438
 
|






II. Petitioner’s Tax Reporting and Respondent’s Section 482 Allocations
Petitioner timely filed its Forms 1120, U.S. Corporation Income Tax Return, for its 2004–07 taxable years. Respondent timely mailed notices of deficiency to petitioner with respect to its 2004–07 taxable years. The notices of deficiency allocated, pursuant to section 482, income from Altera International to Altera U.S. by increasing Altera International’s cost-sharing payments for 2004–07 by the following amounts:
 




Year
 
|Cost-sharing payment adjustment
 
|
2004
 
|$24,549,315
 
|
2005
 
|23,015,453
 
|
2006
 
|17,365,388
 
|
2007
 
|15,463,565
 
|




Bringing petitioner into compliance with the final rule was the sole purpose of the cost-sharing adjustments in the notice of deficiency.


III. Section 482

A. Arm’s–Length Standard
Section 482 authorizes the Commissioner to allocate income and expenses among related entities to prevent tax evasion and to ensure that taxpayers clearly reflect income relating to transactions between related entities. The first sentence of section 482 provides, in relevant part, as follows:
In any case of two or more organizations, trades, or businesses * * * owned or controlled directly or indirectly by the same interests, the Secretary *95 [2] may distribute, apportion, or allocate gross income, deductions, credits, or allowances between or among such organizations, trades, or businesses, if he determines that such distribution, apportionment, or allocation is necessary in order to prevent evasion of taxes or clearly to reflect the income of any of such organizations, trades, or businesses. * * *
 
Section 1.482–1(a)(1), Income Tax Regs., explains the purpose of section 482 as follows:
The purpose of section 482 is to ensure that taxpayers clearly reflect income attributable to controlled transactions and to prevent the avoidance of taxes with respect to such transactions. Section 482 places a controlled taxpayer [3] on a tax parity with an uncontrolled taxpayer by determining the true taxable income of the controlled taxpayer. * * *
Section 1.482–1(b)(1), Income Tax Regs., provides that
[i]n determining the true taxable income of a controlled taxpayer, the standard to be applied in every case is that of a taxpayer dealing at arm’s length with an uncontrolled taxpayer. A controlled transaction meets the arm’s length standard if the results of the transaction are consistent with the results that would have been realized if uncontrolled taxpayers had engaged in the same transaction under the same circumstances (arm’s length result). However, because identical transactions can rarely be located, whether a transaction produces an arm’s length result generally will be determined by reference to the results of comparable transactions under comparable circumstances. * * *
 
The arm’s-length standard is also incorporated into numerous income tax treaties between the United States and foreign countries. See, e.g., Convention for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion With Respect to Taxes on Income and on Capital Gains, U.S.-U.K. (2001 U.S.-U.K. Income Tax Convention), art. 9, July 24, 2001, Tax Treaties (CCH) para. 10,901.09, at 201,019; U.S. Model Income Tax Convention of Nov. 15, 2006 (2006 U.S. Model Income Tax Convention), art. 9, Tax Treaties (CCH) para. 209.09, at 10,559; Treasury Department Technical Explanation of the 2001 U.S.-U.K. Income Tax Convention, art. 9, Tax Treaties (CCH) para. 10,911, at 201,306 (“This Article incorporates in the Convention the arm’s-length principle *96 reflected in the U.S. domestic transfer pricing provisions, particularly Code section 482.”); Treasury Department Technical Explanation of the 2006 U.S. Model Income Tax Convention, art. 9, Tax Treaties (CCH) para. 215, at 10,640 (same).
 


B. Commensurate–With–Income Standard
In 1986 Congress amended section 482 by adding, in relevant part, the following sentence: “In the case of any transfer (or license) of intangible property * * *, the income with respect to such transfer or license shall be commensurate with the income attributable to the intangible.” Tax Reform Act of 1986, Pub.L. No. 99–514, sec. 1231(e)(1), 100 Stat. at 2562.
 
The House report that accompanied the House version of the 1986 amendment to section 482 states, in relevant part, as follows:
Many observers have questioned the effectiveness of the “arm’s length” approach of the regulations under section 482. A recurrent problem is the absence of comparable arm’s length transactions between unrelated parties, and the inconsistent results of attempting to impose an arm’s length concept in the absence of comparables.
* * *
 
The problems are particularly acute in the case of transfers of high-profit potential intangibles. Taxpayers may transfer such intangibles to foreign related corporations or to possession corporations at an early stage, for a relatively low royalty, and take the position that it was not possible at the time of the transfers to predict the subsequent success of the product. Even in the case of a proven high-profit intangible, taxpayers frequently take the position that intercompany royalty rates may appropriately be set on the basis of industry norms for transfers of much less profitable items.
Certain judicial interpretations of section 482 suggest that pricing arrangements between unrelated parties for items of the same apparent general category as those involved in the related party transfer may in some circumstances be considered a “safe harbor” for related party pricing arrangements, even though there are significant differences in the volume and risks involved, or in other factors. * * *
In many cases firms that develop high profit-potential intangibles tend to retain their rights or transfer them to related parties in which they retain an equity interest in order to maximize their profits. * * * Industry norms for transfers to unrelated parties of less profitable intangibles frequently are not realistic comparables in these cases.
*97 There are extreme difficulties in determining whether the arm’s length transfers between unrelated parties are comparable. The committee thus concludes that it is appropriate to require that the payment made on a transfer of intangibles to a related foreign corporation or possessions corporation be commensurate with the income attributable to the intangible. * * *
* * *
 
The basic requirement of the bill is that payments with respect to intangibles that a U.S. person transfers to a related foreign corporation or possessions corporation must be commensurate with the income attributable to the intangible. * * *
In making this change, the committee intends to make it clear that industry norms or other unrelated party transactions do not provide a safe-harbor minimum payment for related party intangibles transfers. Where taxpayers transfer intangibles with a high profit potential, the compensation for the intangibles should be greater than industry averages or norms. * * *
* * *
 
In requiring that payments be commensurate with the income stream, the bill does not intend to mandate the use of the “contract manufacturer” or “cost-plus” methods of allocating income or any other particular method. As under present law, all the facts and circumstances are to be considered in determining what pricing methods are appropriate in cases involving intangible property, including the extent to which the transferee bears real risks with respect to its ability to make a profit from the intangible or, instead, sells products produced with the intangible largely to related parties (which may involve little sales risk or activity) and has a market essentially dependent on, or assured by, such related parties’ marketing efforts. However, the profit or income stream generated by or associated with intangible property is to be given primary weight.
H.R. Rept. No. 99–426, at 423–426 (1985), 1986–3 C.B. (Vol.2) 1, 423–426.
 
The conference report that accompanied the 1986 amendment to section 482 states, in relevant part, as follows:
In view of the fact that the objective of these provisions—that the division of income between related parties reasonably reflect the relative economic activity undertaken by each—applies equally to inbound transfers, the conferees concluded that it would be appropriate for these principles to apply to transfers between related parties generally if income must otherwise be taken into account.
* * *
 
The conferees are also aware that many important and difficult issues under section 482 are left unresolved by this legislation. The conferees *98 believe that a comprehensive study of intercompany pricing rules by the Internal Revenue Service should be conducted and that careful consideration should be given to whether the existing regulations could be modified in any respect.
In revising section 482, the conferees do not intend to preclude the use of certain bona fide research and development cost-sharing arrangements as an appropriate method of allocating income attributable to intangibles among related parties, if and to the extent such agreements are consistent with the purposes of this provision that the income allocated among the parties reasonably reflect the actual economic activity undertaken by each. Under such a bona fide cost-sharing arrangement, the cost-sharer would be expected to bear its portion of all research and development costs, on unsuccessful as well as successful products within an appropriate product area, and the costs of research and development at all relevant development stages would be included. In order for cost-sharing arrangements to produce results consistent with the changes made by the Act to royalty arrangements, it is envisioned that the allocation of R & D cost-sharing arrangements generally should be proportionate to profit as determined before deduction for research and development. In addition, to the extent, if any, that one party is actually contributing funds toward research and development at a significantly earlier point in time than the other, or is otherwise effectively putting its funds at risk to a greater extent than the other, it would be expected that an appropriate return would be required to such party to reflect its investment.
H.R. Conf. Rept. No. 99–841 (Vol.II), at II–637 through II–638 (1986), 1986–3 C.B. (Vol.4) 1, 637–638.
 


C. Treasury’s Position That the Commensurate–With–Income Standard Was Intended To Work Consistently With the Arm’s–Length Standard
As the conference report suggested, Treasury and the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) conducted a comprehensive study of the regulations under section 482, the results of which they published in Notice 88–123, 1988–2 C.B. 458 (1988 White Paper).
 
The 1988 White Paper concluded that the arm’s-length standard is the international norm for making transfer pricing adjustments. Id., 1988–2 C.B. at 475 (“The arm’s length standard is embodied in all U.S. tax treaties; it is in each major model treaty, including the U.S. Model Convention; it is incorporated into most tax treaties to which the United States is not a party; it has been explicitly adopted by international organizations that have addressed themselves to transfer pricing issues; and virtually every major industrial nation takes the arm’s length standard as its *99 frame of reference in transfer pricing cases.” (Fn.ref.omitted.)). The 1988 White Paper further concluded that Congress intended for the commensurate-with-income standard to work consistently with the arm’s-length standard. See id. (“To allay fears that Congress intended the commensurate with income standard to be implemented in a manner inconsistent with international transfer pricing norms and U.S. treaty obligations, Treasury officials publicly stated that Congress intended no departure from the arm’s length standard, and that the Treasury Department would so interpret the new law.”).
 
The 1988 White Paper explained that the commensurate-with-income standard is consistent with the arm’s-length standard because
[l]ooking at the income related to the intangible and splitting it according to relative economic contributions is consistent with what unrelated parties do. The general goal of the commensurate with income standard is, therefore, to ensure that each party earns the income or return from the intangible that an unrelated party would earn in an arm’s length transfer of the intangible.
Id., 1988–2 C.B. at 472. Accordingly, in technical explanations to numerous income tax treaties that the United States has entered into since then, Treasury has repeatedly affirmed that Congress intended for the commensurate-with-income standard to work consistently with the arm’s-length standard. See, e.g., Treasury Department Technical Explanation of the 2001 U.S.-U.K. Income Tax Convention, art. 9, Tax Treaties (CCH) para. 10,911, at 201,307 (“It is understood that the ‘commensurate with income’ standard for determining appropriate transfer prices for intangibles, added to Code section 482 by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, was designed to operate consistently with the arm’s-length standard.”); Treasury Department Technical Explanation of the 2006 U.S. Model Income Tax Convention, art. 9, Tax Treaties (CCH) para. 215, at 10,640–10,641 (same).
 


IV. 1995 Cost–Sharing Regulations
We have previously considered whether controlled taxpayers must include stock-based compensation in the pool of costs to be shared. Most recently, in Xilinx Inc. v. Commissioner, 125 T.C. 37, 2005 WL 2082798 (2005), aff’d, 598 F.3d 1191 (9th Cir.2010), we addressed the treatment of stock-based compensation *100 with respect to taxable years subject to cost-sharing regulations that Treasury finalized in 1995 (1995 cost-sharing regulations). Because our findings and conclusions, and the conclusions of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, in Xilinx are relevant in these cases, we briefly review the 1995 cost-sharing regulations, our Opinion in Xilinx, and the opinions of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit in that case.
 


A. Regulatory Provisions
The 1995 cost-sharing regulations prohibited the District Director from making allocations under section 482 “except to the extent necessary to make each controlled participant’s share of the costs * * * of intangible development under the qualified cost-sharing arrangement equal to its share of reasonably anticipated benefits attributable to such development”. T.D. 8632, 1996–1 C.B. 85, 90. The 1995 cost-sharing regulations further provided that “a controlled participant’s costs of developing intangibles * * * [include] all of the costs incurred by that participant related to the intangible development area”. Id., 1996–1 C.B. at 92.
 


B. Our Opinion in Xilinx
In Xilinx Inc. v. Commissioner, 125 T.C. 37, 2005 WL 2082798, the taxpayer challenged deficiencies determined under the 1995 cost-sharing regulations on the basis of the Commissioner’s determination that the taxpayer should have included the value of stock-based compensation in the intangible development cost pool. Assuming arguendo that the value of stock-based compensation is a cost under the 1995 cost-sharing regulations, we held that the Commissioner’s allocations failed to satisfy the arm’s-length standard of section 1 .482–1(b)(1), Income Tax Regs. See id. at 53.
 
In reaching this holding we concluded that, consistent with the 1995 cost-sharing regulations, (1) in determining the true taxable income of a controlled taxpayer, the arm’s-length standard applies in all cases, see id. at 54–55; (2) the arm’s-length standard requires an analysis of what unrelated entities would do, see id. at 53–54; (3) the commensurate-with-income standard was never intended to supplant the arm’s-length standard, see id. at 56–58; and (4) unrelated parties *101 would not share the exercise spread or grant date value4 of stock-based compensation, see id. at 58–62.
 
In concluding that unrelated parties would not share either the exercise spread or grant date value of stock-based compensation, (1) we observed that the Commissioner’s expert agreed that unrelated parties would not explicitly share the exercise spread or grant date value of stock-based compensation because unrelated parties would find it hard to agree how to measure such value and because doing so would leave them open to potential disputes, see id. at 58; (2) we found that the taxpayers proved that companies do not take into account either the exercise spread or grant date value of stock-based compensation for product pricing purposes, see id. at 59; (3) we observed that the Commissioner produced no credible evidence showing that unrelated parties implicitly share the exercise spread or grant date value of stock-based compensation, see id.; (4) we credited the testimony of the taxpayers’ numerous fact witnesses who testified that unrelated parties do not share either the exercise spread or grant date value of stock-based compensation in cost-sharing agreements, see id.; (5) we found that the taxpayers proved that “if unrelated parties believed that the spread and grant date value were costs”, they “would be very explicit about their treatment”, id.; (6) we credited the testimony of the taxpayers’ expert who testified that unrelated parties would not agree to share spread-based cost because doing so would create perverse incentives for each party to diminish the stock price of the other, see id. at 61; and (7) we observed that during the years in issue the grant value of stock-based compensation was generally not treated as an expense for tax and financial accounting purposes, see id. at 61–62.
 


C. The Ninth Circuit Opinions in Xilinx
The U.S. Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit initially reversed our Opinion in Xilinx. The majority opinion by Judge Fisher reasoned that “[b]ecause the all costs requirement [of the 1995 cost-sharing regulations] is irreconcilable *102 with the arm’s length standard,” the more specific all costs requirement controls. Xilinx Inc. v. Commissioner, 567 F.3d 482, 489 (9th Cir.2009), rev’g and remanding 125 T.C. 37, 2005 WL 2082798, withdrawn, 592 F.3d 1017 (9th Cir.2010). The dissenting opinion by Judge Noonan agreed that the regulations were irreconcilable, see id. at 497 (Noonan, J., dissenting), but concluded that the all costs requirement should be construed as not applying to stock-based compensation because (1) the regulations should be interpreted in the light of the dominant purpose of the statute—“parity between taxpayers in uncontrolled transactions and taxpayers in controlled transactions”, id. at 498; (2) any inconsistencies in the regulations should be construed against the Government, see id.; and (3) Treasury’s technical explanation of the income tax convention between the United States and Ireland confirms that the commensurate-with-income standard is meant to work consistently with the arm’s-length standard, see id. at 498–500 (“ ‘This article incorporates in the Convention the arm’s[-]length principle reflected in the U.S. domestic transfer pricing provision, particularly Code section 482. * * * It is understood that the ‘commensurate with income’ standard for determining appropriate transfer prices for intangibles, added to Codesection 482 by the Tax Reform Act of 1986, was designed to operate consistently with the arm’s-length standard.’ “ (quoting Treasury Department Technical Explanation of the Convention for the Avoidance of Double Taxation and the Prevention of Fiscal Evasion with Respect to Taxes on Income and Capital Gains Signed at Dublin on July 28, 1997, and the Protocol Signed at Dublin on July 28, 1997 (1997 U.S.-Ir. Income Tax Convention and Protocol), U.S.-Ir., Tax Treaties (CCH) para. 4435, at 103,223)).
 
The Court of Appeals subsequently withdrew its opinion in Xilinx and issued a new opinion affirming our Opinion in Xilinx. The new opinion by Judge Noonan was in substance similar to his original dissenting opinion, with the exception that the new opinion did not rest its reasoning on the notion that inconsistencies in the regulations should be resolved against the Government. See Xilinx Inc. v. Commissioner, 598 F.3d at 1191–1197 (Noonan, J.).
 
Judge Fisher’s concurring opinion first explained the parties’ “dueling interpretations of the ‘arm’s length standard’ “. Id. at 1197 (Fisher, J., concurring). According to Judge *103 Fisher, Xilinx contended that the arm’s-length standard required “controlled parties * * * [to] share only those costs uncontrolled parties share .” Id. By contrast, the Commissioner contended that
analyzing comparable transactions is unhelpful in situations where related and unrelated parties always occupy materially different circumstances. As applied to sharing * * * [employee-stock-option (ESO) ] costs, the Commissioner argues (consistent with the tax court’s findings) that the reason unrelated parties do not, and would not, share ESO costs is that they are unwilling to expose themselves to an obligation that will vary with an unrelated company’s stock price. Related companies are less prone to this concern precisely because they are related—i.e., because XI is wholly owned by Xilinx, it is already exposed to variations in Xilinx’s overall stock price, at least in some respects. * * *
Id. Judge Fisher concluded “that Xilinx’s understanding of the regulations is the more reasonable even if the Commissioner’s current interpretation may be theoretically plausible.” Id. at 1198. He further explained that “we need not defer to * * * [the Commissioner’s interpretation of the arm’s-length standard] because he has not clearly articulated his rationale until now.” Id. (citing United States v. Thompson/Ctr. Arms Co., 504 U.S. 505, 518–519 & n. 9, 112 S.Ct. 2102, 119 L.Ed.2d 308 (1992)). In a footnote Judge Fisher added: “It is an open question whether these flaws have been addressed in the new regulations Treasury issued after the tax years at issue in this case.” Id. n. 4. Notwithstanding Judge Fisher’s concerns, Judge Reinhardt, dissenting, would have continued to adhere to the panel’s original opinion. See id. at 1199–1200 (Reinhardt, J., dissenting).
 


V. 2003 Cost–Sharing Regulations

A. Notice of Proposed Rulemaking
In July 2002 Treasury issued a notice of proposed rulemaking and notice of a public hearing (NPRM) with respect to proposed amendments to the 1995 cost-sharing regulations. The NPRM set a public hearing on the proposed amendments for November 20, 2002. See 67 Fed.Reg. 48997 (July 29, 2002). The preamble to the NPRM states that the proposed amendments to the 1995 cost-sharing regulations sought to clarify
*104 that stock-based compensation must be taken into account in determining operating expenses under § 1.482–7(d)(1)[, Income Tax Regs.,] and to provide rules for measuring stock-based compensation costs * * * [, and] to include express provisions to coordinate the cost sharing rules of § 1.482–7 [, Income Tax Regs.,] with the arm’s length standard as set forth in § 1.482–1[, Income Tax Regs].
Id. at 48998.
 


B. Comments Submitted in Response to the Proposed Regulations
In response to the NPRM the following persons and organizations submitted written comments to Treasury: (1) American Electronics Association (AeA); (2) Baker & McKenzie, LLP, on behalf of the Software Finance and Tax Executives Council (SoFTEC); (3) Deloitte & Touche, LLP; (4) Ernst & Young LLP, on behalf of the Global Competitiveness Coalition (Global); (5) Fenwick & West, LLP (Fenwick); (6) Financial Executives International (FEI); (7) Information Technology Association of America; (8) Information Technology Industry Council; (9) KPMG, LLP; (10) PricewaterhouseCoopers, LLP (PwC); (11) Irish Office of the Revenue Commissioners; (12) Joseph A. Grundfest, W.A. Franke Professor of Law and Business, Stanford Law School; (13) Xilinx Inc. Additionally, the following four persons spoke at the November 20, 2002, public hearing: (1) Eric D. Ryan, of PwC; (2) Ron Schrotenboer, of Fenwick; (3) John M. Peterson, Jr., of Baker & McKenzie, LLP and on behalf of SoFTEC; and (4) Caroline Graves Hurley, of AeA.5
 
Several of the commentators informed Treasury that they knew of no transactions between unrelated parties, including any cost-sharing arrangement, service agreement, or other contract, that required one party to pay or reimburse the other party for amounts attributable to stock-based compensation.
 
AeA provided to Treasury the results of a survey of its members. AeA member companies reviewed their arm’s-length codevelopment and joint venture agreements and found none in which the parties shared stock-based compensation. For those agreements that did not explicitly address the treatment of stock-based compensation, the *105 companies reviewed their accounting records and found none in which any costs associated with stock-based compensation were shared.
 
AeA and PwC represented to Treasury that they conducted multiple searches of the Electronic Data Gathering, Analysis, and Retrieval (EDGAR) system6 and found no cost-sharing agreements between unrelated parties in which the parties agreed to share either the exercise spread or grant date value of stock-based compensation.
 
Several commentators identified arm’s-length agreements in which stock-based compensation was not shared or reimbursed. For example, (1) AeA identified, and PwC provided, a 1997 collaboration agreement between Amylin Pharmaceuticals, Inc., and Hoechst Marion Roussel, Inc. (Amylin–HMR collaboration agreement), that did not include stock options in the pool of costs to be shared; (2) PwC identified a joint development agreement between the biotechnology company AgraQuest, Inc., and Rohm & Haas under which only “out-of-pocket costs” would be shared; (3) PwC identified a 1999 cost-sharing agreement between software companies Healtheon Corp. and Beech Street Corp. that expressly excluded stock options from the pool of expenses to be shared. Additionally, in written comments, and again at the November 20, 2002, hearing, Ms. Hurley offered to provide Treasury with more detailed information regarding several agreements involving AeA member companies, provided that the companies received adequate assurances that their proprietary information would not be disclosed.7
 
FEI submitted model accounting procedures from the Council of Petroleum Accountant Societies (COPAS) for sharing costs among joint operating agreement partners in the petroleum industry. FEI noted that COPAS recommends that joint operating agreements should not allow stock *106 options to be charged against the joint account because they are difficult to accurately value.
 
AeA, SoFTEC, KPMG, and PwC cited the practice of the Federal Government, which regularly enters into cost-reimbursement contracts at arm’s length. They noted that Federal acquisition regulations prohibit reimbursement of amounts attributable to stock-based compensation.8
 
AeA, Global, and PwC explained that, from an economic perspective, unrelated parties would not agree to share or reimburse amounts related to stock-based compensation because the value of stock-based compensation is speculative, potentially large, and completely outside the control of the parties. SoFTEC provided a detailed economic analysis from economists William Baumol and Burton Malkiel reaching the same conclusion.
 
Finally, the Baumol and Malkiel analysis concluded that there is no net economic cost to a corporation or its shareholders from the issuance of stock-based compensation. Similarly, Mr. Grundfest asserted that a company’s “decision to grant options to employees * * * does not change its operating expenses” and does not factor into its pricing decisions.
 


C. Final Rule
1. Regulatory Provisions
In August 2003 Treasury issued the final rule. The final rule explicitly required parties to QCSAs to share stock-based compensation costs. See sec. 1.482–7(d)(2), Income Tax Regs. The final rule also added sections 1.482–1(b)(2)(i) through 1.482–7(a)(3), Income Tax Regs., to provide that a QCSA produces an arm’s-length result only if the parties’ costs are determined in accordance with the final rule. See T.D. 9088, 2003–2 C.B. 841, 847–848.
 
The final rule provides two methods for measuring the value of stock-based compensation: a default method and an elective method. Under the default method, “the costs attributable to stock-based compensation generally are included as intangible development costs upon the exercise of the option and measured by the spread between the option strike price *107 and the price of the underlying stock.” Id., 2003–2 C.B. at 844. Under the elective method, “the costs attributable to stock options are taken into account in certain cases in accordance with the ‘fair value’ of the option, as reported for financial accounting purposes either as a charge against income or in footnoted disclosures.” Id. The elective method, however, is available only with respect to options on stock that is publicly traded “on an established United States securities market and is issued by a company whose financial statements are prepared in accordance with United States generally accepted accounting principles for the taxable year.” Sec. 1.482–7(d)(3) (iii)(B)(2), Income Tax Regs.
 

2. Lack of Evidence From Uncontrolled Transactions
When it issued the final rule, the files maintained by Treasury relating to the final rule did not contain any expert opinions, empirical data, or published or unpublished articles, papers, surveys, or reports supporting a determination that the amounts attributable to stock-based compensation must be included in the cost pool of QCSAs to achieve an arm’s-length result. Those files also did not contain any record that Treasury searched any database that could have contained agreements between unrelated parties relating to joint undertakings or the provision of services. Additionally, Treasury was unaware of any written contract between unrelated parties, whether in a cost-sharing arrangement or otherwise, that required one party to pay or reimburse the other party for amounts attributable to stock-based compensation; or any evidence of any actual transaction between unrelated parties, whether in a cost-sharing arrangement or otherwise, in which one party paid or reimbursed the other party for amounts attributable to stock-based compensation.
 

3. Response to Comments
The preamble to the final rule responded to comments that asserted that the proposed amendments to the 1995 cost-sharing regulations were inconsistent with the arm’s-length standard, in relevant part, as follows:
Treasury and the IRS continue to believe that requiring stock-based compensation to be taken into account for purposes of QCSAs is consistent with the legislative intent underlying section 482 and with the arm’s length standard (and therefore with the obligations of the United *108 States under its income tax treaties and with the OECD transfer pricing guidelines). The legislative history of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 expressed Congress’s intent to respect cost sharing arrangements as consistent with the commensurate with income standard, and therefore consistent with the arm’s length standard, if and to the extent that the participants’ shares of income “reasonably reflect the actual economic activity undertaken by each.” See H.R. Conf. Rep[t]. No. 99–481 [Vol. II], at II–638 (1986). * * * In order for the costs incurred by a participant to reasonably reflect its actual economic activity, the costs must be determined on a comprehensive basis. Therefore, in order for a QCSA to reach an arm’s length result consistent with legislative intent, the QCSA must reflect all relevant costs, including such critical elements of cost as the cost of compensating employees for providing services related to the development of the intangibles pursuant to the QCSA. Treasury and the IRS do not believe that there is any basis for distinguishing between stock-based compensation and other forms of compensation in this context.
Treasury and the IRS do not agree with the comments that assert that taking stock-based compensation into account in the QCSA context would be inconsistent with the arm’s length standard in the absence of evidence that parties at arm’s length take stock-based compensation into account in similar circumstances. Section 1.482–1(b)(1)[, Income Tax Regs.,] provides that a “controlled transaction meets the arm’s length standard if the results of the transaction are consistent with the results that would have been realized if uncontrolled taxpayers had engaged in the same transaction under the same circumstances.” * * * While the results actually realized in similar transactions under similar circumstances ordinarily provide significant evidence in determining whether a controlled transaction meets the arm’s length standard, in the case of QCSAs such data may not be available. As recognized in the legislative history of the Tax Reform Act of 1986, there is little, if any, public data regarding transactions involving high-profit intangibles. H.R. Rep [t]. No. 99–426, at 423–[4]25 (1985). The uncontrolled transactions cited by commentators do not share enough characteristics of QCSAs involving the development of high-profit intangibles to establish that parties at arm’s length would not take stock options into account in the context of an arrangement similar to a QCSA. Government contractors that are entitled to reimbursement for services on a cost-plus basis under government procurement law assume substantially less entrepreneurial risk than that assumed by service providers that participate in QCSAs, and therefore the economic relationship between the parties to such an arrangement is very different from the economic relationship between participants in a QCSA. The other agreements highlighted by commentators establish arrangements that differ significantly from QCSAs in that they provide for the payment of markups on cost or of non-cost-based service fees to service providers within the arrangement or for the payment of royalties among participants in the arrangement. Such terms, which may have the effect of mitigating the impact of using *109 a cost base to be shared or reimbursed that is less than comprehensive, would not be permitted by the QCSA regulations. * * *
The regulations relating to QCSAs have as their focus reaching results consistent with what parties at arm’s length generally would do if they entered into cost sharing arrangements for the development of high-profit intangibles. These final regulations reflect that at arm’s length the parties to an arrangement that is based on the sharing of costs to develop intangibles in order to obtain the benefit of an independent right to exploit such intangibles would ensure through bargaining that the arrangement reflected all relevant costs, including all costs of compensating employees for providing services related to the arrangement. Parties dealing at arm’s length in such an arrangement based on the sharing of costs and benefits generally would not distinguish between stock-based compensation and other forms of compensation.
For example, assume that two parties are negotiating an arrangement similar to a QCSA in order to attempt to develop patentable pharmaceutical products, and that they anticipate that they will benefit equally from their exploitation of such patents in their respective geographic markets. Assume further that one party is considering the commitment of several employees to perform research with respect to the arrangement. That party would not agree to commit employees to an arrangement that is based on the sharing of costs in order to obtain the benefit of independent exploitation rights unless the other party agrees to reimburse its share of the compensation costs of the employees. Treasury and the IRS believe that if a significant element of that compensation consists of stock-based compensation, the party committing employees to the arrangement generally would not agree to do so on terms that ignore the stock-based compensation.
T.D. 9088, 2003–2 C.B. at 842–843.
 
The preamble to the final rule responded to comments that asserted that stock-based compensation does not constitute an economic cost, or relevant economic cost, as follows:
Treasury and the IRS continue to believe that requiring stock-based compensation to be taken into account in the context of QCSAs is appropriate. The final regulations provide that stock-based compensation must be taken into account in the context of QCSAs because such a result is consistent with the arm’s length standard. Treasury and the IRS agree that the disposition of financial reporting issues does not mandate a particular result under these regulations.
Id., 2003–2 C.B. at 843.
 
The preamble to the final rule responded to comments that asserted that parties at arm’s length would not share either the exercise spread or grant date value of stock-based compensation because they would produce results that are too speculative or not sufficiently related to the employee services that are compensated, as follows:
*110 Treasury and the IRS believe that it is appropriate for regulations to prescribe guidance in this context that is consistent with the arm’s length standard and that also is objective and administrable. As long as the measurement method is determined at or before grant date, either of the prescribed measurement methods can be expected to result in an appropriate allocation of costs among QCSA participants and therefore would be consistent with the arm’s length standard.
Id., 2003–2 C.B. at 844.
 
Finally, the preamble to the final rule states that “[i]t has also been determined that [APA] section 553(b) * * * does not apply to these regulations.” Id., 2003–2 C.B. at 847.
 
