TITLE:
United States Tax Court.
GUIDANT LLC f.k.a. Guidant Corporation, and Subsidiaries, et al.,1 Petitioners
v.
COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE, Respondent
Docket Nos. 5989–11, 5990–11, 10985–11, 26876–11, 5501–12, 5502–12
|

BACKGROUND:

I. Preliminaries
We have derived the recitations listed in this background section primarily from the undisputed portions of each party’s statement of the facts, as drawn from the pleadings and other acceptable materials. We also have derived some of the recitations from the disputed portions of each party’s statement of the facts, as viewed in a manner most favorable to respondent, the party opposing petitioners’ motion for partial summary judgment. We set forth all recitations solely for purposes of deciding petitioners’ motion and not as findings of fact. See Sundstrand Corp. v. Commissioner, 98 T.C. 518, 520 (1992), aff’d, 17 F.3d 965 (7th Cir.1994).
 


II. Guidant Group

A. Guidant Corp.
Guidant Corp. is a U.S. corporation that from 2001 through 2006 was the parent of an affiliated group that included its U.S. subsidiaries Cardiac Pacemakers, Inc. (CPI), CardioThoracic Systems, Inc. (CTS), Guidant Sales *64 Corp. (GSC), Advanced Cardiovascular Systems, Inc. (ACS), and Endovascular Technologies, Inc. (EVT). Boston Scientific Corp. (BSC) acquired Guidant Corp. on April 21, 2006. Guidant Corp. and each of its U.S. subsidiaries were thereafter separate members of the affiliated group of which BSC was the parent. Guidant Corp. remained the parent of its remaining subsidiaries for which it had been the parent before BSC acquired Guidant Corp.
 
Guidant Corp. and its U.S. and foreign business entities (collectively, subsidiaries) developed, manufactured, and sold medical devices. Guidant Corp. and its subsidiaries conducted business throughout the developed world.
 


B. Subsidiaries
For each subject year Guidant Corps.’s first-tier U.S. subsidiaries included CPI and CTS, and Guidant Corp.’s second-tier U.S. subsidiaries included GSC. From 2001 through 2006 Guidant Corp.’s first-tier U.S. subsidiaries also included ACS and EVT.
 
Guidant Corp.’s first-, second-, and third-tier foreign subsidiaries included two Netherlands corporations, Guidant BV (renamed Guidant Group BV in 2003) and Guidant Puerto Rico BV, and one Luxembourg corporation, Guidant Luxembourg SARL. Guidant Puerto Rico BV and Guidant Luxembourg SARL were subsidiaries of Guidant BV.
 
Guidant Luxembourg SARL owned and operated a manufacturing facility through a branch, Guidant Ireland, established in Ireland. Guidant Puerto Rico BV owned and operated a manufacturing facility through a branch, Guidant Puerto Rico, established in Puerto Rico. Guidant Corp. provided administrative services to Guidant Ireland and to Guidant Puerto Rico.
 


III. Guidant Group Business Units

A. Background
The Guidant group consisted of various business units operated by separate corporations. From 2001 through April 21, 2006, these business units were Cardiac Rhythm Management (CRM), Endovascular Solutions (ES), Vascular Intervention (VI), and Cardiac Surgery (CS). On April 21, *65 2006, the Guidant group sold its VI and ES business units. Thereafter, the Guidant group consisted of the CRM and the CS business units.
 


B. CRM
CRM devices included pulse generators (PGs) (e.g., pacemakers, implantable cardiac defibrillators, and cardiac resynchronization devices) and leads.
 
CPI operated the CRM business unit during all subject years.
 


C. ES
ES devices included an aortic vascular prosthesis (Ancure) that could be delivered via balloon catheter to treat aortic aneurysms.
 
EVT operated the ES business unit from 2001 through part of 2003. Guidant Endovascular Solutions, Inc. (GES), a U.S. corporation, assumed EVT’s operations on January 1, 2004. GES did not participate in any of the controlled transactions at issue.
 


D. VI
VI devices included balloon catheters used in angioplasty procedures, coronary stents and their delivery systems, and guidewires used to direct balloon catheters and stent delivery systems to the area of treatment.
 
ACS operated the VI business unit during 2001 through 2006.
 


E. CS
CS devices included devices used to harvest femoral arteries from a patient for use in coronary artery bypass grafting surgery (Vasoview), off-pump coronary artery bypass (OPCAB) systems, and cardiac ablation devices.
 
CTS operated the CS business unit during all subject years.
 


IV. Devices that Guidant Ireland or Guidant Puerto Rico Manufactured

A. Guidant Ireland
Guidant Ireland manufactured PGs during all subject years. Each PG contained a “hybrid,” which is an electric circuit *66 board to which integrated circuits and other electronic components are bonded.
 
Before 2004 Guidant Ireland purchased from CPI all of the hybrids that were incorporated into the PGs it manufactured. Guidant Ireland began manufacturing hybrids in 2004. From 2004 through 2007 Guidant Ireland manufactured PGs using both hybrids it manufactured and hybrids purchased from CPI.
 
From 2001 until the Guidant group sold the VI business, Guidant Ireland manufactured VI coronary stents and coronary stent delivery systems. From 2005 until that sales date, Guidant Ireland also manufactured VI standalone balloon catheters for use in angioplasty procedures.
 


B. Guidant Puerto Rico
Guidant Puerto Rico manufactured CRM leads and CS Vasoview devices during all subject years. During 2002 and part of 2003, Guidant Puerto Rico also manufactured ES Ancure devices. From 2002 until the Guidant group sold its VI business, Guidant Puerto Rico also manufactured VI guidewires. From 2004 through the end of the subject years, Guidant Puerto Rico also manufactured CS cardiac ablation devices. During 2007 Guidant Puerto Rico also manufactured CS OPCAB systems.
 


C. Sales of Devices
GSC was the Guidant group’s U.S. marketing and sales affiliate. GSC sold and distributed to end users in the U.S. devices that Guidant Ireland or Guidant Puerto Rico manufactured.
 
Foreign Guidant Corp. distribution subsidiaries (Guidant foreign sales affiliates) sold in many countries outside of the U.S. devices that Guidant Corp. and its subsidiaries manufactured. In a foreign market with a Guidant foreign sales affiliate, that affiliate sold and distributed to end users in its market devices that Guidant Ireland or Guidant Puerto Rico manufactured. In foreign markets without a Guidant foreign sales affiliate, independent third-party foreign distributors sold and distributed to end users devices that Guidant Corp. and its subsidiaries manufactured.
 


*67 V. Controlled Transactions Related to Devices That Guidant Ireland or Guidant Puerto Rico Manufactured

A. Guidant Ireland CRM Devices
CPI owned intangible property related to CRM PGs and hybrids that it licensed to Guidant Ireland in exchange for royalties.
 
CPI manufactured and sold CRM hybrids to Guidant Ireland. Guidant Ireland sold finished CRM devices to GSC and to CPI. CPI resold the Guidant Ireland CRM devices it purchased to independent third-party foreign distributors. Guidant Ireland also sold finished CRM devices directly to Guidant foreign sales affiliates and to independent third-party foreign distributors.
 


B. Guidant Puerto Rico CRM Devices
CPI owned intangible property related to CRM leads that it licensed to Guidant Puerto Rico in exchange for royalties.
 
Guidant Puerto Rico sold CRM leads it manufactured to GSC and to CPI. CPI resold the Guidant Puerto Rico leads it purchased to the Guidant foreign sales affiliates and to independent third-party foreign distributors. Guidant Puerto Rico also sold CRM leads it manufactured to Guidant Ireland. Guidant Ireland resold the Guidant Puerto Rico leads it purchased to the Guidant foreign sales affiliates and to the independent third-party foreign distributors.
 


C. Guidant Ireland VI Devices
ACS owned intangible property related to VI stents, stent delivery systems, and angioplasty balloon catheters that it licensed to Guidant Ireland. Guidant Ireland paid ACS royalties in exchange for that license.
 
Before Guidant Ireland gained VI product sterilization capabilities in 2004, Guidant Ireland sold all of the VI devices it manufactured to ACS. ACS sterilized the Guidant Ireland VI devices it purchased in return for a sterilization fee. ACS resold the Guidant Ireland VI devices it purchased and sterilized to GSC, to the Guidant foreign sales affiliates, and to the independent third-party foreign distributors.
 
After Guidant Ireland gained VI product sterilization capabilities in 2004, Guidant Ireland continued selling its VI devices intended for the U.S. market to ACS. ACS continued to resell these devices to GSC. After Guidant Ireland gained *68 VI product sterilization capabilities in 2004, Guidant Ireland also sold its VI devices intended for foreign markets to the Guidant foreign sales affiliates and to the independent third-party foreign distributors.
 


D. Guidant Puerto Rico VI Devices
ACS owned intangible property related to VI guidewires that it licensed to Guidant Puerto Rico. Guidant Puerto Rico paid ACS royalties in exchange for that license.
 
Guidant Puerto Rico sold all of the VI devices it manufactured to ACS. ACS sterilized the Guidant Puerto Rico VI devices it purchased in return for a sterilization fee. ACS resold the Guidant Puerto Rico VI devices it purchased to GSC, to the Guidant foreign sales affiliates, and to the independent third-party foreign distributors.
 


E. Guidant Puerto Rico ES Devices
EVT owned intangible property related to ES Ancure devices that it licensed to Guidant Puerto Rico. Guidant Puerto Rico paid EVT royalties in exchange for that license.
 
Guidant Puerto Rico sold all of the ES devices it manufactured to EVT. EVT resold the Guidant Puerto Rico ES devices it purchased to GSC, to the Guidant foreign sales affiliates, and to the independent third-party foreign distributors.
 


F. Guidant Puerto Rico CS Devices
CTS owned intangible property related to CS Vasoview devices, OPCAB systems, and cardiac ablation devices that it licensed to Guidant Puerto Rico. Guidant Puerto Rico paid CTS royalties in exchange for that license.
 
Guidant Puerto Rico sold all of the CS devices it manufactured to CTS. CTS resold the Guidant Puerto Rico CS devices it purchased to GSC, to the Guidant foreign sales affiliates, and to the independent third-party foreign distributors.
 


VI. Audit
Respondent audited the consolidated Federal income tax returns that the Guidant group filed for 2001 through April 21, 2006, and the consolidated Federal income tax returns that BSC and its U.S. subsidiaries (BSC group) filed for 2006 and 2007. During the audits respondent considered, as to the *69 years ended on or before April 21, 2006, whether income was allocated properly between the Guidant group and their foreign affiliates; and as to 2006 and 2007, whether income was allocated properly between the BSC group and their foreign affiliates. Respondent considered whether the transfer of intangible property, the sale of components and finished goods, and the provision of services with respect to certain products (collectively, transactions at issue) were made at arm’s length. For each subject year, the transactions at issue involved Guidant Corp., CPI, CTS, and GSC. The transactions at issue also involved ACS for 2001 through April 2006 and EVT for 2001 through 2003.
 
To evaluate whether income was allocated at arm’s length between the Guidant group and their foreign affiliates, respondent considered petitioners’ transfer pricing studies, as well as financial data and other information made available by petitioners and that was publicly available. In connection with the audit for 2006 and 2007, respondent also considered the methodologies and approaches taken with respect to the audit for the 2001 through April 2006 examination cycles. Respondent concluded that income was not allocated at arm’s length between the Guidant group and their foreign affiliates and adjusted Guidant Corp.’s STI for each subject year to effect a pro tanto adjustment to the groups’ CTI for those years. Respondent did not compute specific adjustments for each controlled taxpayer included in the group (member-specific adjustments). The IRS’ practice is to compute member-specific adjustments when the taxpayer and the audit team can agree on such adjustments or when the audit team has sufficient information to make them. The IRS’ practice is to defer making member-specific adjustments in other circumstances until a final resolution has been reached because these determinations often involve complex calculations, as well as extensive and collaborative discussions with the taxpayer. Because the parties did not reach a resolution of the section 482 issue, respondent did not expend time or resources to determine member-specific adjustments for each Guidant group controlled taxpayer.
 
Respondent did not believe that he could independently make reliable member-specific adjustments on the basis of the information available to him. Respondent considered the complexity of the activities of each member of the Guidant *70 group and its relationship with the activities of other members of the Guidant group and/or of their foreign affiliates. Respondent also concluded that he could not independently make reliable member-specific adjustments for each of the Guidant group members after considering the flow of products among Guidant group entities, involving multiple steps and multiple transfer pricing transactions. For many products, the flow involved a “round trip” from the United States to Ireland or to Puerto Rico and back.
 
Each Guidant group member’s available financial statements encompassed all activities the entity performed and all products produced and sold, including those not at issue in these cases. Respondent was unable to extract the information necessary to ascertain the income reported by each Guidant group member with respect to the products and transactions at issue and to determine the STI of each Guidant group member for the products and transactions at issue. Petitioners did not maintain their financial records in a manner that allowed them to readily track income and expenses by place of manufacture, and petitioners could not tie the income and expenses in the business unit financial statements to particular product lines, e.g., pulse generators or leads, or to products manufactured in the United States, in Ireland, or in Puerto Rico.
 
An example of the information that respondent needed to determine the income reported by each Guidant group member with respect to the products manufactured in Ireland and in Puerto Rico was the transfer prices paid by each Guidant group member. For the VI business, ACS purchased finished products from Guidant Ireland and Guidant Puerto Rico at a set transfer price. ACS then either resold these products to GSC or to Guidant group foreign distribution affiliates at a different transfer price or sold these products to an independent foreign distributor at a final sale price. Respondent did not have the transfer prices for any of these transactions so as to determine the profit reported by each Guidant group member for the products at issue. While the available information enabled respondent to make what he considered a reliable calculation of CTI for the Guidant group, he did not believe the available information enabled him to make a sufficiently reliable calculation of member-specific adjustments for each of the Guidant group members.
 


*71 VII. Deficiency Notices

A. Deficiency Notice for 2001 and 2002
The deficiency notice for 2001 and 2002 described the section 482 adjustments as follows:
It is determined under IRC section 482 that an adjustment is necessary to reflect an arm’s length result for intercompany transactions that Guidant Corporation and its U.S. subsidiaries entered into with Guidant Corporation’s directly and indirectly owned foreign subsidiaries regarding Cardiac Rhythm Management, Vascular Intervention, Cardiac Surgery, and Endovascular Solutions products produced in the Puerto Rico and Ireland manufacturing operations of Guidant Puerto Rico B.V. and Guidant Luxembourg during tax years 2001 and 2002. In order to properly reflect an arm’s length result for these intercompany transactions, Guidant Corporation’s income for the tax years 2001 and 2002 is increased in the amount of $446,100,000 and $554,000,000, respectively.
The deficiency notice for 2003 described the section 482 adjustments as follows:
It is determined under IRC section 482 that an adjustment is necessary to reflect an arm’s length result for intercompany transactions that Guidant Corporation and its U.S. subsidiaries entered into with Guidant Corporation’s directly and indirectly owned foreign subsidiaries regarding Cardiac Rhythm Management, Vascular Intervention, Cardiac Surgery, and Endovascular Solutions products produced in the Puerto Rico and Ireland manufacturing operations of Guidant Puerto Rico B.V. and Guidant Luxembourg during tax year 2003. In order to properly reflect an arm’s length result for these intercompany transactions, Guidant Corporation’s income for the tax year 2003 is increased in the amount of $481,000,000.
Those notices did not calculate or specify what, if any, amount of the section 482 adjustments was attributable to CPI, to ACS, to EVT, to CTS, or to GSC, or to specific types of controlled transactions.
 


B. Deficiency Notice for 2004 through April 2006
The deficiency notice for 2004 through April 2006 described the section 482 adjustments as follows:
It is determined under IRC section 482 that an adjustment is necessary to reflect an arm’s length result for intercompany transactions that Guidant Corporation and its U.S. subsidiaries entered into with Guidant Corporation’s directly and indirectly owned foreign subsidiaries regarding Cardiac Rhythm Management, Vascular Intervention, Cardiac Surgery, and Endovascular Solutions products produced in the Puerto *72 Rico and Ireland manufacturing operations of Guidant Puerto Rico B.V. and Guidant Luxembourg during the tax years ended December 31, 2004, December 31, 2005, and April 21, 2006. Therefore, in order to properly reflect an arm’s length result for these intercompany transactions, taxable income is increased $627,800,000, $470,900,000, and $98,300,000 for the tax years ended December 31, 2004, December 31, 2005, and April 21, 2006, respectively.
 
That notice did not calculate or specify what, if any, amount of the section 482 adjustments was attributable to CPI, to ACS, to EVT, to CTS, or to GSC, or to specific types of controlled transactions.
 


C. Deficiency Notice for 2006 and 2007
The deficiency notice for 2006 and 2007 described the section 482 adjustments as follows:
It is determined under IRC section § 482 [sic] that an adjustment is necessary to reflect an arm’s length result for intercompany transactions that Guidant Corporation and its U.S. subsidiaries entered into with Guidant Corporation’s directly and indirectly owned foreign subsidiaries regarding Cardiac Rhythm Management and Cardiac Surgery products produced in the Puerto Rico and Ireland manufacturing operations of Guidant Group B.V., a controlled foreign corporation of Guidant Corporation and 100% owner of Guidant Luxembourg and Guidant Puerto Rico BV during tax years 2006 and 2007. In order to properly reflect an arm’s length result for these intercompany transactions, Guidant Corporation’s income for tax years 2006 and 2007 is increased in the amount of $264,923,837 and $544,022,295, respectively.
This notice did not calculate or specify what, if any, amount of the section 482 adjustments was attributable to CPI, to CTS, or to GSC, or to specific types of controlled transactions.
 
