TITLE:
United States Tax Court.
TBL LICENSING LLC f.k.a. The Timberland Company, and Subsidiaries (a Consolidated Group), Petitioner
v.
COMMISSIONER OF INTERNAL REVENUE, Respondent

BACKGROUND:
The events that gave rise to the dispute before us occurred as part of a postacquisition restructuring carried out after a business combination involving VF Corp. (VF) and the Timberland Co. (Timberland). Through its subsidiaries, VF designs, manufactures, and sells apparel and footwear under brands such as Lee, Wrangler, Nautica, Vans, and the North Face. Timberland’s business involved the design, development, manufacture, marketing, and sale of footwear, apparel, and accessories under its own brand and others, such as SmartWool.
 
The VF and Timberland businesses were combined on September 13, 2011, by means of a merger into Timberland of an acquisition subsidiary of TBL International Properties, LLC (International Properties). In the merger, the former Timberland shareholders received cash in exchange for their Timberland stock.
 
VF had organized International Properties in August 2011 as a limited liability company under Delaware law. The parties have stipulated that International Properties “has been a disregarded entity from the time of its formation.”
 
Petitioner is also a Delaware limited liability company whose sole member interest was owned, throughout the events in issue, by International Properties. The parties have stipulated that “[p]etitioner was treated as a corporation for U.S. federal *4 income tax purposes at all times during the taxable year at issue.”
 
Before the merger in which International Properties acquired Timberland, VF transferred its membership interest in International Properties to VF Enterprises S.à.r.l. (VF Enterprises), an indirect foreign subsidiary of VF. As part of the postacquisition restructuring, petitioner came to own Timberland’s intangible property, including trademarks, foreign workforce, and foreign customer relationships.
 
On September 22, 2011, after the close of the merger by which International Properties acquired the Timberland stock and after petitioner had acquired Timberland’s intangible property, VF Enterprises contributed to TBL GmbH the sole member interest in International Properties.2 About a week later, petitioner elected under Treasury Regulation § 301.7701-3(c)(1)(i) to be disregarded as an entity separate from its owner, effective September 24, 2011.
 
On the Form 926, Return by a U.S. Transferor of Property to a Foreign Corporation, included with its Federal income tax return for the taxable year ended September 23, 2011, petitioner reported that the trademarks it acquired from Timberland had a fair market value of $1,274,100,000. Respondent assigned the same value to the trademarks in computing the deficiency in issue.
 
The parties have stipulated that Lee Bell, Inc. (Lee Bell), an indirect domestic subsidiary of VF and indirect parent of VF Enterprises, reported income under section 367(d)(2)(A)(ii)(I) in specified amounts for the taxable years 2011 through 2017. The stipulation does not attribute those amounts to petitioner’s constructive transfer of intangible property to TBL GmbH, but the materials the parties have submitted in support of and opposition to the pending motions for summary judgment demonstrate that each accepts that the inclusions in Lee Bell’s income relate to that transfer.3 The parties also *5 stipulated that Lee Bell never owned the intangible property that petitioner constructively transferred to TBL GmbH.
 
